there was a memorable line in a
mainstream Hollywood movie terrible
movie but had one good line in it and
that line was war is Old Men talking and
young a man dying and I googled around
to see if anyone else had actually used
that before in some other language did
that come from an ancient Greek source
did that come from Shakespeare did that
come from any plausible political
philosopher and no apparently it did
originate with a really crappy
mainstream Hollywood movie so there you
go some frustrated writer contributing
to that project managed to get that into
the script by and large party politics
mainstream party politics is a struggle
between people in their 40s and people
in their 70s with the balance of wealth
power and decision making being in the
hands of the people in their 70s and the
people who are in their 40s having the
delusion that they're young and that
they represent the people you know these
are two different elites but when you
look at the debates that currently
divide the American Democrat Party the
relatively young people in their 40s
if those debates they don't represent
the common man they don't represent the
youth or the next generation or what
have you but they are struggling against
the entrenched interests of people in
their 70s who are still holding on to
power and influence in that party and
who have a platform or set of objectives
set of policy goals not really commence
trouble with what those people in their
40s want so that is by and large the
rule for how mainstream party politics
works and at any given time you might
have a little bit of a paradigm shift
where the people in their 40s take over
power and guess what it's not always an
improvement we tend to use these vague
terms like reform and progress as if the
relatively young people with relatively
new ideas are always going to be better
and always going to be correct whereas
the old people with the old ideas are
always going to be wrong
France has been through this several
times just in the last 20 years they
keep having these paradigm shifts where
the new young people take over and
everyone is optimistic for about six
months this happened again with Emanuel
Nicole so the current Prime Minister of
France Matt Kroll he's about the same
age I am you know what everyone regards
him as young I think he's 41 41 is young
right oh the young people with these new
ideas are taking over well guess what
they're terrible ideas guess what he
used to be a member of the Socialist
Party what did he represent after he
gave up or quit socialism might be might
be even worse than mainstream socialism
now both 70 at the time this video is
being recorded 71 percent of the
population are opposed to the leadership
of Matt crawl and there are literally
riots in the streets and people building
barricades and lighting things on fire
demanding his resignation
so that was quick and the history of
other major leaders of France within my
lifetime has been a similar kind of
rapid inversion of public expectations
the brief period of optimism that
somebody coming into power represented
new hope and new ideas and then finding
out either they didn't represent any
real meaningful alternative to what
basically can be called neoliberalism or
that the alternative they were offering
was even worse than what they had before
within the United States
I think this same thing could be said to
a limited extent about you know
President Obama the the hopes that
surrounded Obama when he was first
elected and that this was some kind of
turning point in the history of
neoliberalism you have to go back to a
much earlier stage of politics in the
United Kingdom in England you have to
look at the the first election of Tony
Blair when Tony Blair published all the
vague promises in his book the
stakeholder society that was his
manifesto when he came into power when
people thought this was something new
and different it was new and different
from quote/unquote old labour there was
old labor versus new labor and it's also
supposed to be something different from
neoliberalism which back then was called
neoconservatism and we found out we
found out just what it was that Tony
Blair really represented and what he
gave the British people so we have had a
long series of disappointments of this
kind in the succession of 40 year olds
struggling to take power away from
seven-year-olds absurdly in the United
States right now Bernie Sanders
represents the relatively young people
and he is in its 70s you know about
Bernie Sanders struggle against the
Grandy's of the of the Democrat Party
and you know the particular policy what
goals Bernie Sanders represents
obviously are more popular with both
Democrats and Republicans than what the
mainstream of either party now
represents and maybe we'll see some
interesting dirham unfold well coming
out of that maybe not um I have a
question sent in to me which was
basically asking me about my own ability
to identify with any political party my
own ability to insinuate myself into or
participate in the party system and for
me in a meaningful sense this question
I've gotten from Jordan Chariton Jordan
Jordan's wife has actually been helping
me with with Chinese lately she's fluent
in Chinese so I've been writing and
translating some things in the Chinese
and have set her some questions and I
really appreciate her or helped me on
with that um identity politics is right
now one of the most abused and most
misunderstood concepts and political
science and it's a great shame because
in answering this question I think it's
really it's really useful it's really
important to be able to use identity
politics in a meaningful and accurate
sense there are millions of people
millions who vote conservative for no
reason other than the fact that they
have always voted conservative that
their parents and their grandparents
voted conservative they have a kind of
heredity of political party affiliation
they've inherited what they think of as
a political identity
they may well put some work into
cultivating their children trying to
pass on that that political identity to
the next generation properly understood
the reason why we have this category of
identity politics as something separate
from ethno politics something separate
from ethnicity is that there are
important ways in which political
identity operates in any given political
theater as something quite distinct from
ethnicity as something quite distinct
from religion religious membership
religious affiliation and you know it
may even be something that that
contradicts you know particular policy
goals that you know you may have people
who personally believe that abortion is
acceptable and fine and good that they
have no problem with abortion but they
still feel committed to the political
identity of being a member of the
Republican Party in the United States or
the Conservative Party in England or
whatever example maybe in other anyway
there are other cases look at gay rights
or other sort of quote-unquote watershed
issues and you find many people try to
address those issues within their own
party because their party affiliation
comes first and foremost they're not
gonna switch parties over that issue
they're going to try to resolve or
address that that policy issue that
policy goal within their their party
affiliations they can hold on to this
political identity it's the point being
um this politics especially mainstream
party politics is not a theater of
rational actor economic choice making
people do not vote the way they pick a
brand of toothpaste they don't stand
there and look at the political parties
like different brands of toothpaste and
say well you know I want something
that's all natural and made of organic
ingredients but I want something that
does have fluoride I noticed these
hippie toothpastes they say all-natural
organic but they don't have fluoride I
want something that's approved they're
not coming to this they're not coming to
the political party aisle with a given
list of policy demands and interests to
then make those decisions in a rational
in
on a rational choice model they're not
there are there's a sense of personal
identity very often an ethical sense of
identity now we've had a huge
distraction for more than a century with
the idea of class identity and class
interest being a major major focus of
political science and political theory
my small number of yours I can ask you
if any of you think the your political
affiliation and voting choices would
change if overnight suddenly you became
much much wealthier than you are if you
were suddenly promoted from being a
worker to being an executive and an
investor if your class identity changed
would it change within five years what
political demands what policies
immersion and conversely if some of you
in my audience are shall we say members
of the ruling class if your financial
fortunes suddenly became much worse if
your class identity changed would your
political identity change again sorry
this is incredibly simple but it really
is a great weakness in the marxist class
analysis approach to society for most
people whether they're rich or poor or
whether they their class identity
fundamentally changes from one period
their life to another and for many of us
it changes it many times most of us in
the 21st century we may know what it's
like to be rich we may know what it's
like to be poor we may know what it's
like to give orders and take orders work
in different stations and different
arrangements change careers change where
we're living and the conditions of our
life many many times um and yet what it
is we're pursuing and how we pursue it
in the mainstream political party system
does not change with our class
affiliation with our social classes
affiliation our working class
affiliation etc etc and we we have a
very clear sense of both policy goals
and identity politics properly
understood as something meaningful and
quite separate from class identity so in
the 21st century it's peculiar that we
can say
it would be a luxury to have a political
identity at all
Jordan is writing to me saying that he
feels homeless and rootless within the
political party system I think the
majority of my viewers feel that way
well you say he doesn't feel he has a
home in the Conservative Party the
Liberal Party or the new Democrat Party
these are the big choices in Canada he
doesn't feel there's any easy way for
him to sign up for any of these parties
he doesn't feel that any of these
parties are catering to him offering him
a set of solutions to problems he can
endorse her policy aspirations and goals
he can he can get on board with well
Jordan if I don't miss my guess you're
at the time of life when you're in your
40s and politically it now becomes
incumbent on you to stand up against the
people in the 70s and in pardon me there
are people in their 70s the people over
70 years old who control the parties and
to either transform one of the parties
to serve your interest or create a new
political party I think this is the push
and pull that in most mainstream Western
democracies all the parties are gonna
have to go through if you look at a
checklist of the leading issues you
really care about sit down and do this
alone and challenge yourself to really
be a hundred percent honest what would
be the issues on your platform some
people perceive me as left-wing or
liberal some people perceive me as
conservative um I'm I want a tough on
drugs policy I do not see what sense it
makes to quote-unquote tolerate people
using heroin and cocaine in the streets
of Vancouver in the streets of Victoria
now if that's my only criterion if
that's the only political objective I
care about you know what political
parties are gonna be a member of and
wish I can't now I also have hard
criteria I care about and then I
probably care about more having to do
with ecology environmentalism veganism
and
you know status of indigenous people
native people indigenous languages
minority languages going extinct you
know there's a range of other issues
where if those are on my checklist
almost all of them are gonna force me to
the left wing side of the Canadian
spectrum the left wing parties will any
of those parties have me can I
participate in them or contribute aid
can I contribute to them positively at
all I think the answer is no and again I
really do feel I've done a lot of
polling I've had a lot of interaction
with this audience over the last five
years I think the majority of people
watching this video whether you're
watching in Australia or England or the
United States or Canada wherever you may
be I think the majority of people who
watch my videos are living in countries
where their fundamental policy goals
their fundamental policy their interests
alienate them from make them enemies of
any of the existing political parties
and that is right now in 2018 largely
because in settled Western democracies
the agenda the stated policy goals of
the ruling mainstream parties have been
created by people in their 70s people in
their 80s people in their 90's an aging
geriatric generation of political hacks
who maybe were coming up with new ideas
you know 40 years ago but have long
since shuffled into a kind of holding
pattern that disregards me as you know
the examples United States are
especially notorious disregards really
basic really obvious problems like
illegal immigration balance-of-payments
international trade ignores the question
of minimum wage the plight of the poor
very broadly speaking ignores the
question of how poor people are supposed
to have health care nor does the
question of how people are supposed to
have poor people are supposed to access
higher education and you know that's a
generalization above the situation in
the United States which the Bernie
Sanders campaign throws into relief for
all of us makes it very easy for us to
see clearly
honestly the situation in Canada is
maybe only 20% different on every one of
those issues we were just looking at the
cost of tuition for getting a getting a
diploma as a schoolteacher like a normal
primary school teacher to be qualified
for that in Canada and it's over 20,000
Canadian dollars per year anyway other
programs here you know or ten thousand
dollars and five thousand dollars it it
varies it's not all it's not all the
same but nevertheless I know everyone
here in Canada can pat themselves on the
back and say tuition is not as expensive
in Canada as it is in the United States
I just had an email from an old friend
and colleague in New Zealand and I
commented to her well look the price of
tuition in New Zealand is way too high
it cost University and her immediate
response was it's not as bad in New
Zealand as it is in Australia well and I
believe her it's the same kind of thing
it's very easy to make these excuses
when you're not quite as bad as the the
country next door it's dealt with true
I've been on the streets of Los Angeles
I've been on the streets of you know
Seattle as well as Vancouver and
Victoria it's easy to reassure yourself
that the drug epidemic the drug problem
is not as bad as in Canada as is in
United States and of course that the
illegal immigration problem is not as
bad as geographically you know there are
reasons why you'd have more illegal
immigrants seeking out opportunities in
California than in Canada it's also
warmer down there and so on
but across the board if you just put
together what are your what are your
basic demands and so on actually do you
think that this problem is going to be
very similar in in Canada versus the
United States
there was a time when political parties
were incredibly powerful in what's
called a party machine above all else
because they provided people with paid
employment I hate to tell you if you go
back to the 1930s that's ultimately what
it was they commanded tremendous fealty
and they were just tremendously
efficient and organizing people because
they employed people
and today you know many things have
pushed and pulled that and transformed
the quote unquote party machine how
political parties actually work but
today most political parties are really
just a Facebook page they're a passive
digital nexus for the dissemination of
information and to a lesser extent
collecting information and collecting
donations from party inherence and party
members and that's made everyone lazy
now the old fashioned model of the party
system from the 1930s
it didn't make people lazy but it did
make people corrupt parties were deeply
involved in getting someone a job as a
garbage man they were deeply involved in
relocating the post office to benefit
one part of town versus another if you
really study political science that used
to be the lifeblood of the party machine
that massively motivated public
participation at many levels in in many
ways and there's no doubt in my mind
that the most fundamental progress
Bernie Sanders represents is actually
his YouTube channel is the fact that
Bernie Sanders now makes little short
youtube videos that expresses what his
concerns are what his policy goals are
how he wants to get there and just this
process of conversation and
dissemination has already had amazing
real-world outcomes I was just told that
Disneyland of California they have
resolved to increase their minimum wage
within the company because of the
criticism from Bernie Sanders the heads
of Amazon Corporation have set a new
minimum wage within their corporation
just because of the critiques again that
I've seen on YouTube to some extent
they're also of course in lectures and
written article form coming from from
Bernie Sanders like never before there
seems to be the potential for civil
society to take over the role of the of
the mass media to participate in you
know what we what we now call social
media and for civil society and formal
party politics to work together to share
information
express their aspirations and then get
organized to achieve real-world outcomes
the problem is money I'm concerned about
you know indigenous people in Canada I'm
concerned about prison conditions use
two examples if I actually want to go to
northern Manitoba and you know let's say
I have my my camera with me is use my
cell phone camera and go and interview
some people and look at political
conditions and look at quality of life
and government policy and what's been
going on in northern Manitoba I could
get into why I'm thinking of other
Manitoba there's there's no point for
this this video and I want to report
back to that the potential for me to do
that now
thanks to YouTube in the 21st century
and for me to actually draw attention to
a problem and get government action or
get government policy to change or
better intervention or get the
government to stop doing something
that's not working start putting the
money in a sign that will be working the
potential for that is greater than ever
before if I were to just go to a river
and take a sample of the water and film
myself taking the sample and put the
water in a laboratory and pay them to do
the analysis and then I start talking
about water pollution in that River and
where it comes from and film myself
walking to the factory and film this
spigot that's putting the pollution into
that River from the factory you know
YouTube empowers us to make a difference
this way like never before and it's not
YouTube in isolation and it's not just
the interaction between YouTube and the
audience it's ultimately an inevitably
YouTube and Parliament or YouTube in the
house of Congress it still does involve
elected representatives having people in
government that are going to go to bat
for you at least in voicing those
concerns that's a tremendously positive
thing as never before however there is
an absolute scarcity of money in that
system nobody is gonna pay you to go up
to northern Manitoba or remote part of
Northern Ontario like a de la Paz cat no
one's gonna pay you to go to James Bay
and make that film and talk to those
people and engage in that activism no
one is going to pay you for going to the
river and taking that sample and
and running those tests whatever the
particular issue is you decided to take
a stand on and try to get involved in
and the cost in the barriers to entry
and the dependence of the whole system
on donations means that the formal Party
politics side remains utterly hopelessly
in the clutches of retired people its
retired people who donate the money and
have the time and even location to be
sitting at and dominating those meetings
and forming the party agenda you know so
what we're dealing with here is not so
much a class analysis and not so much a
difference in political identity it is
really a generational clash or a
generational crisis and this is one of
the very few conclusions about political
science in the 21st century that I can
say is true of practically the whole of
Western Europe North America Australia
the shall we say the European
parliamentary world and is therefore
it's there anything positive I could say
at the end of this video no I think that
the powerlessness my generation still
feels in its 40s the powerlessness
I mean even felt by Bernie Sanders and
Jimmy Dore and the Justice Democrats and
all of the you know people militating
for reform within the system I think
that powerlessness is is very real and
the contrast between that and the the
false sense of power and community and
camaraderie that you get from the
internet from social media I think
that's only going to incentivize people
to disengage from the real world of
politics and pour their time into
frankly a simulated world of pseudo
politics here on YouTube here on the
internet and to disengage from
political party system that seemingly
has no interest in basically serving the
public